erasurecoding/README.md, before:

# Erasure encoding test vectors using reed-solomon-simd 3.0.1 matching polkajam

This uses [reed-solomon-simd 3.0.1](https://docs.rs/reed-solomon-simd/3.0.1/reed_solomon_simd/)
(which supports 2-byte alignment and no longer requires 64 byte alignment) to encode:
* a small work package bundle (268 bytes) 
* a segment (4104) 
in tiny (C=2, V=6) -- see [GP Appendix H - tiny](https://hackmd.io/@sourabhniyogi/jam-appendixh-tiny) 

The `test_encode`  tests a key functions `encode` that generates `test_{bundle,segment}_{268,4104}_{tiny}.json` 

Run the test:

```rust
   Compiling erasure-coding v0.1.0 (/Users/michael/Desktop/jamtestnet/erasurecoding)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.49s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/erasure_coding-359b9c06d6b8514d)

running 1 test
✅ encode SUCCESS 268 bytes into 6 shards (2 original, 4 recovery) → test_bundle_268_tiny.json
✅ encode SUCCESS 4104 bytes into 6 shards (2 original, 4 recovery) → test_segment_4104_tiny.json
test tests::test_encode ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.10s
```

It is desirable to streamline this and have GP text updated to match the approach.

Commit message:

test_encode_and_decode (#228)
The `test_encode_and_decode`  tests a key function `encode` that generates `test_{bundle,segment}_{268,4104}_{tiny}.json` and does a few (3) trials of decoding

Based on jaymansfield tip "Just calculated number of expected pairs, then extracted each 2-byte pair from the same position across the original shards. Each of these pair groups were erasure coded, and then combined each set of results afterwards".

Two cases pass exactly in tiny:
 (1) 268 byte work package bundle (naturally generated from polkajam CE137 responses of 2+4 bundle shards)
 (2) 4104 byte https://github.com/davxy/jam-test-vectors/blob/erasure_coding/erasure_conding/test_segment_shards_tiny.json

This is sufficient to proceed to compute erasure root in guarantees/work reports/availability spec, which we confirmed works, extending to bundle verification.

erasurecoding/README.md, after:

# Erasure encoding test vectors using reed-solomon-simd 3.0.1 matching polkajam

This uses [reed-solomon-simd 3.0.1](https://docs.rs/reed-solomon-simd/3.0.1/reed_solomon_simd/)
(which supports 2-byte alignment and no longer requires 64 byte alignment) to encode:
* a small work package bundle (268 bytes) 
* a segment (4104) 
in tiny (C=2, V=6) case -- see [GP Appendix H - tiny](https://hackmd.io/@sourabhniyogi/jam-appendixh-tiny) 

The `test_encode_and_decode`  tests a key function `encode` that generates `test_{bundle,segment}_{268,4104}_{tiny}.json` and does a few (3) trials of decoding.

Run the test:

```rust
% cargo test --release --lib -- --nocapture
...
running 1 test
✅ trial 0 succeeded
✅ trial 1 succeeded
✅ trial 2 succeeded
✅ encode+decode SUCCESS — all 3 trials passed for 268 bytes into 6 shards (2 original, 4 recovery)
✅ trial 0 succeeded
✅ trial 1 succeeded
✅ trial 2 succeeded
✅ encode+decode SUCCESS — all 3 trials passed for 4104 bytes into 6 shards (2 original, 4 recovery)
test tests::test_encode_and_decode ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.86s
```

It is desirable to streamline this so that the encoding+decoding does NOT do k separate `encoder.encode` and `decoder.decode` calls, and have GP text updated to match the approach.  In addition, this should be made to work for the "full" (V=1023) case.
